hello Matt fans welcome to the fourth
tom rocks mass appeal livestream sorry a
few minutes hi schedule technical issues
as always with these live streams so
this week the plan is the same as before
I'll start off with some questions and
into me looking at the topic we covered
in the video on Monday so this week's
topic was linear graphs or straight line
graphs so I'll start with some questions
that have already be been sent in to
begin with and then I'll try and leave a
bit more time than normal at the end to
then open it up to the live chat
so hopefully you insist that Bobby and
Susan as usual have been answering your
questions that's the mass appeal team
those of you who are perhaps are
familiar and they released a video
earlier today where they talked about
gradients of horizontal and vertical
lines and they threw out a question to
me to ask about infinite gradient
because they wanted to know from I guess
university petitions perspective what do
we how can we think of an infinite
gradient so I thought it was a good
place to start seeing as they mentioned
it in their VDH respectability so this
came up when we were discussing
horizontal and vertical lines and it was
actually a question from dilip so again
thank you to leap for the question and
this is asking what would be gradient B
or what would be equation B for our
straight line graph y equals MX plus C
what's the gradient y equals MX plus C
what is the gradient when we have a
vertical line so the the equation of the
line discussed by susan in her answer is
x equals constant right so for any
vertical line x equal to a constant is
the equation and as I vary this constant
the line just moves positive negative
direction now the gradient question
so the the way I think about this
because I would call this an infinite
gradient I would think of this as saying
the beeline has an infinite gradient and
there are two different ways I think of
approaching it so the first one would be
to consider taking a limit as your gray
do gets larger and larger so if you
think about saying what if we had y
equals let's take it as n X plus C so n
here is your your number which
represents your gradient and remember
from our video you hopefully will recall
if I have a line like so the gradient of
this line is equal to the change in Y
over the change in X where the triangle
Delta means change so if this has
gradient n then I could say for example
let's call this one let's call this n
just make it nice and simple put it in
this simplest ratio so I'm going on and
I'm going up and now if to get this line
to look like the vertical line you're
making it steeper and steeper and
steeper so if I were to sort of draw in
another line and then draw in another
line and then draw in another line so
these lines are getting steeper and
steeper so the gradient n is getting
larger right so suppose this was like 2
then this will be 3 4 5 it's increasing
you're getting steeper you're going up
by more each time for the one you go
across so what you're really doing is
wanting to take for your vertical line
we want to let take the limit as n gets
bigger and bigger which is taking the
limit as n goes to infinity so for a
vertical line you can think of it as the
limit as n goes y equals the limit as n
goes to infinity of an X plus C would be
one interpretation so I'm not going to
write down that the gradient is infinite
I'm not going to like actually write y
equals infinity X plus C because that
doesn't make any sense but I can write
this
and in theory this would describe the
vertical line based on my picture of
increasing this number n which is our
gradient now the other interpretation
would be to try and figure out well what
do we need for our equation y equals MX
plus C to actually turn into x equals
constant because we've said in our video
discussing straight line graphs they
always have this form so how are we
going to do this so we've got y equals
MX plus C and we want to let M our
gradient be really big right going to
infinity but it's basically saying it's
getting bigger and bigger and bigger so
can I rearrange this for X might be an
interesting thing to think about right
so this is my equation then what I can
do is I can write M X subtract C from
both sides then if I divide by M X is
going to now equal I minus C over m and
now I want to let em go to infinity is
this right so M X is y minus C X is y
minus C over m and then I want to take
the limit as this goes to infinity so
that would suggest X would be 0 in fact
wouldn't it I was hoping this is going
to give me the X is constant so in this
context it would indeed if we now let em
get really big so that M goes to
infinity then X would tend to 0 okay so
we can't quite get it as x equals
constant but this idea here does at
least show that you can start from an
equation involving x and y and then we
divide by this M or gradient but then M
gets steeper and steeper and steeper and
as we let that go to infinity that is
what is causing the Y term to vanish so
that's the key
whilst this isn't quite work out
perfectly it does at least explain why
the y term vanishes from our equation
all right so that was an efficient of
horizontal vertical based on Bobby and
Susan's questions from earlier okay so
that was the first question I wanted to
look at now another question which is
slightly more advanced than what we did
in the lesson on Monday so this one came
in from Sarah and Sarah asked how can we
work out the intersection of two
straight lines so let's start with a
little diagram these are always helpful
so I'm gonna have one line and this is
going to be y equals MX plus C and now
we want the second line so let's have
let me think about how to draw this I
mean it doesn't matter too much but
let's make this negative why not right
that's how that another straight line
now this one is going to be labeled as y
equals a different gradient I'm gonna
call it a X plus B so I have two
straight line equations the gradient
here is M the y-intercept is C so I know
that is see the gradient here is a the
y-intercept is B right so I've got two
straight lines and Sarah's question was
can we work out where they intersect can
we figure out this point so the answer
is yes we definitely can we have enough
information in our diagram to to figure
out the answer and the way we're going
to do it is algebraically so we have the
picture which shows as they are
intersecting and then that's an
interesting question whether they may or
may not intersect I'll come back to that
remind me if I forget so we want to try
and figure out where do they intersect
now we've got two equations and on this
equation here this line y is always
equal to
a times our x value plus B and then
along this line Y is always equal to M
times our x value plus C so in both
cases we've got y equals something and
both of them are y so this is this is
basically going to tell us what the Y
value must be here so this is x and y
are unknown intersection points so why
is this and why is this so I can combine
the two equations and say that ax plus B
has to be equal to MX plus C like that
and now I can do is rearrange for X
actually let's write it as a separate
equation to make it a bit clearer so
just to say what's happened both of
these are Y both of these have equations
in terms of Y why is this and why is
this so at the point where they cross
both of them are true so both of them
are true I can put them equal to each
other so we've got ax plus B is MX plus
C X is the only unknown in this equation
so if I do X minus MX equals C minus B
just subtracting and rearranging a
little bit then I get x times a minus M
is C minus B so X is C minus B over a
minus M I remember ABC and M are all
given in our equations so we now have a
formula for the intersection point X and
it's given by the difference so change
I'd maybe not use that better it's given
by the difference in the intercepts so
difference in intercepts divided by
because our intercept sub C and B here
at see here it's B divided by the
difference in the gradients
a minus M so you have to be careful
about your negatives but ultimately your
x-coordinate is just the difference in
the intercepts over the difference in
your gradients now we need to also find
out the y coordinate so we figured out
the x intercept for any two lines now
for the y coordinate all we have to do
is pick one of them and plug in our x
value so let's use MX plus C standard 1
y equals MX plus C and then we know that
X is that so that tells me that Y is now
M C minus B over a minus M plus C can I
simplify that a little bit I think I can
I'm gonna try by writing everything over
the same denominator so if I multiply C
by a minus M on the top and on the
bottom so it's that plus C a minus M
over a minus M now they both have the
same denominator so I can just add them
at them and I'll get em C minus BM plus
AC minus M C so all divided by a minus M
and so then there's a slight
simplification isn't there because I've
got MC the minus MC so those two vanish
so it turns into AC minus BM over a -
them so the thing on the top this is not
just the difference in the intercepts or
gradients it's sort of a combination of
both if you're if you're if you still
need anything to do with determinants
it's like the determinant of the linear
system but don't worry if that means
nothing and then we're dividing by the
difference in the gradients again so
we've got the difference in the
gradients is the denominator here
and it's the same denominator over here
so this is a general formula given to
and we'll know the equations your x
intercept of those de lines y will
always be equal to this ad minus BM over
a minus M and X will always be equal to
that for two straight line graphs so
great question Sarah and hopefully
that's the answer right so the next one
is to do with linear graphs but kind of
going into a different area altogether
so this one came in from Fred lovely
question in fact oh and so it came in
from Fred and then I got basically the
same question from Rachel so Fred wanted
to know how does y equals MX plus C our
straight line graph formula how does
that work in the context of a line of
best fit and Rachel basically just said
can I explain lines of best fit so I'm
going to talk about lives of best fit
and hopefully answer both friends and
Rachel's questions okay
I've actually been teaching statistics
to my first-year students in Oxford this
week so we've been we've not been quite
doing line the best fit but we talked a
little bit about that kind of idea so
line of best fit the idea is I have a
graph and I have some data points on my
graph so this is why it's statistics so
let's suppose I've got a few points here
there okay so this is a made-up data set
and what you're doing with the line of
best fit is you're trying to understand
or make a prediction perhaps into the
you know for these all the data points
where we don't have values you want to
take the trend or take the pattern
you're seeing here and try to generalize
it or try to extend it in either
direction or maybe just in one direction
but you're trying to figure out what is
the general pattern to my data so
given this you know one way to do it is
just to kind of draw by hand you know so
you're saying write everything as x
increases as x increases so does y so
what this is showing so it's got a nice
positive correlation so if I was
attempting to draw a line of best fit
let's suppose it's that right so that's
my complete estimate by hand
now the the idea of a line of best fit
proper one is instead of me just drawing
a random line and saying you know is
this you know maybe I could have drawn
it slightly different and I want to
compare which of those two lines is
better so let me have a go at drawing
another one because it's quite far away
from this point so I don't like that so
maybe instead I think it actually looks
more like that right so we've got this
call this one l2 and again this is me
just doing this completely made-up
without any kind of actual calculation
so there are two possible lines of best
fit and then what we want to do like
through a proper mathematical formula is
you want to say which of these is
actually better which of the two lines
l1 or l2 better represents your data and
ultimately you want to not just consider
new lines you want to consider all
possible lines that I could have drawn
or possible straight lines here okay so
I'm just focusing on straight lines the
best fit you can get into other shaped
lines but for now we're doing straight
lines and the way you do this is by
measuring the distance between your line
and each point so this seems like
hopefully this seems like a sensible
method so you're saying that I want my
line of best fit to be as close as
possible to every point so we want close
as possible
to all points that's what we want to be
true for our line of best fit because
the closer it is to all of the points
the better it represents the data yes
the livestreams are made available later
they'll probably tomorrow now we want
our line to disclose posters all of
these points so what that means is we
measure the vertical distance between
the point and the line so for example
this point here we measure straight down
to our line and then similarly for this
point you would measure up to your line
obviously that one would be extended
down to there for the green one so
you're looking at measuring all of these
sort of distances so you can see the one
up here is very close to l1 but quite
far from l2 so you measure all of these
distances between your line and then you
want to minimize all of these distances
because if all of these vertical
distances are as small as possible then
what that is telling you is that you
found the best possible line so if I
were to draw them all properly like that
so you want to minimize the distance
from every point to your particular line
so how are we going to formulate that
mathematically how we're going to write
down an equation and how you're going to
figure this out so let's suppose our
line of best fit has equation it's a
straight line so our line of best fit is
y equals MX plus C but we don't at the
moment know M we don't know the gradient
so these have two different gradients l1
is steeper than l2 so M is larger and we
don't at the moment know the intercept
so again the intercepts right you can
see l2 has a larger intercept than l1
it's above it but we don't know what
they are we're considering all possible
gradients all possible intercepts so all
of all values for em all possible values
for C now given this is the formula of
our line if I consider one of my data
points so let's go for this one here
right so here is a data point which has
value x1 now according to my line so
let's focus on l2 as my line okay so the
green one so according to my line at the
point X 1 Y it should be equal to so y1
is equal to well no it's not like one is
it it's why my prediction Y is equal to
M X 1 plus C accord this is my
prediction this is what my line tells me
I start x1 I go up I hit my Green Line
and then this value here satisfies this
equation so it gives me the predicted Y
value but this is a bit above the actual
Y value so if I go across like this and
across like this so this is my
prediction value but the actual value is
y1 is this so what we want to do is
actually work out the difference between
the predicted value and the actual value
right because we want to make that
difference this distance as small as
possible
so we want this to be as small as
possible so the distance there is going
to be Y minus y1 all right so the
distance vertical distance is equal to Y
minus y1 where Y is given by this
formula so that's equal to M x1 plus C
minus y1 ok so I think that is indeed
what I want right so that expression
here
is the distance from my actual data
point x1 to this point why so we want to
make this as small as possible
for this data point now we don't just
want to do this for one data point
however because if I wanted this to be
the only thing minimized I would just
change my line to go through my data
point but I if it goes through this data
point with the same radiant let's say
it's then further away from some of the
others so whilst this is true this is
the distance between to the point x1 if
I take let's call it this on up here
as x2 then I can write down a similar
formula for x2 and y2 where again I have
another prediction which is this one's
very close my prediction here is very
close for the orange line for example so
that's the distance for point x1 then
the distance for the point X 2 this is 2
is going to be so doing the same formula
M x2 plus C minus y2 and this would be
the same so I could do this for x3 x4
all of our other points and we get this
same formula so the distance between all
of the points so the total distance is
equal to all of these added together so
if I suppose I have n points so n
different data points a total distance
is the sum from 1 to N of the distance
function down there so M X I plus C
minus y I right so that is an expression
for the total distance now there's
something we're missing and if any of
you have studied regression models
you'll know what's kind of missing
from our argument so the point is let's
look at this point actually with l2 so
this one up here x2 this point and then
this is our y-value below so this
distance here is from the what am i
doing I'm doing the predicted minus the
actual so predicted is below the actual
so this is negative there that's
negative and whereas when I look at x1
be predicted is above the actual so that
one is positive so when I add together
all of these things over here when I add
together all of these terms in my total
distance formula some of them are
positive and some of them are negative
and but the point is I don't want them
to cancel out so if I have some of them
positive some of them negative they
might cancel each other out despite me
being quite far away from my data points
so that's not a good thing so you have
to take account for the different signs
so the fact that some are negative and
some are positive so you could take the
modulus I could just take the absolute
value of this and put that in your
formula
the problem with absolute values is
they're quite tricky to deal with when
you do derivatives and things which is
what we're going to do so instead of
doing an absolute value you just square
your distance so this is the total
distance where we add together the
individual components but what we want
to do is consider the distance squared
in fact so the distance squared the
distance squared because by considering
the distance squared everything is now
positive and so when you add them all
together you have a function over here
which is now squared so you're adding
together entirely positive things and
the point being we want to make this as
small as possible and if we can make
this as small as possible if you
minimize the distance squared
you also minimize the distance so that's
the idea that's why it's called the
least squares model because if you don't
square things you have positive bits and
negative bits and they can cancel each
other out and not actually give you the
the minimum distance to each point so
this is the function for the total
distance squared adding together all of
those so then the final step the final
sort of more advanced bit is to say well
how do we make that as small as possible
so we now know for a line of best fit
the total distance squared is given by
this formula now we want to minimize the
total distance so minimize the total
distance squared so to do that we have
here a function so X the X I these are
our data points along this axis and y I
these are our data points along the y
axis so they are fixed that's like the
data points you have
so we cannot so they are like there you
can think of them almost as constants
that's fixed we cannot change x and y
what we're changing with these lines is
the gradient and the intercept so this
is a function of M and C this this is
fixed this is fixed for all of the
values of I but M we're allowed to
change and C we're allowed to change and
we want to solve to find the minimum of
this function for both M and C so what
that means
is you want to do partial derivatives DF
by the M equals naught and you want to
differentiate with respect to C and set
it to naught and that will actually then
give you the proper way to calculate M
and C and give you your final regression
model and your final line of best fit
now don't worry if you've never seen
partial derivatives this is way way way
way beyond GCSE maths but I just wanted
to explain basically how a line of best
fit works why it's distance squared to
make sure you're only adding positive
things and then what would sort of come
next if you were doing this properly
with more advanced math skills you're
trying to find a minimum point which is
a turning point on the graph so you do
that by solving the derivatives both
equal to zero right so that's a bit of a
detour of lines of best fit but again
all starting just from the y equals MX
plus C graph so there's a really really
nice questions I'm glad Fred and Rachel
asked about lines of best fit now the
final thing I wanted to discuss before
again I will take some live chat
questions was another question this one
this came from Johnny who asked a very
very fun question I mean these are all
fun questions but I particularly enjoyed
this one from Johnny so he asked can we
use straight lines and only straight
lines to approximate functions so the
answer is yes of course so here we go
here's a here's gonna be some right
there is a random graph random function
I've drawn right so this is going to be
f of X y equals f of X is that graph and
this is X right
now if I want to approximate this and I
can only use straight lines the only
thing I can really do is try and draw
some straight lines right so if I do a
first example if I was going to use just
one but only allowed to use one straight
line how am I going to approximate this
function well it's kind of it's sort of
taking a value up here different value
down here I'd say if I took like if I
took like an average value all right if
I can only use one straight line that is
sort of a reasonable attempt right so
kind of right such as harmony allowed to
use number one one line right it's not
great but it's an approximation now if I
was allowed to use more lines let's say
I'm now allowed to use three all right
so if I was allowed to use three
straight lines then I'd probably do
something like go across there then I
probably come down here I'd probably
stop there actually what I do I'd stop
there
come down there with a nice straight
line and then go flat there by it so
hopefully you can see the second one so
the second one using three lines I've
got a pretty good approximation to that
curve I would say it works really well
here it's working really well here okay
it's missing the kind of curving part
well I've constructed just using three
lines three straight lines I've
constructed pretty good approximation to
our original function so you would just
define this by saying you go like this I
call this now X 1 and this X 2 then I
can just say 4 0 to X 1 so you would say
4 0 2 whoops ex-raf 0 to X 1 I'm going
to define my straight line function
let's call it G of X is going to equal
this constant value right so that's
suppose that was at B I'm just going to
have
y equals B that's my mic don't even need
to do that do I okay so between 0 and X
Y is equal to B then between x1 and x2 1
comma X 2 y is now it's now a negative
gradient so let's write it as minus MX
plus some constant C so I've got that
part of a straight line and then I can
add in the third part which is just
another constant so I call that a and
then for the last part for X greater
than x 2 y is now just a so I've
constructed what is called a a piecewise
function here so piece twice and what
that means is I'm just defining the
function to have different values in
those three different regions but that's
still a valid way to define a function
and as I've hopefully convinced you even
with just three lines I've done a pretty
good job of approximating you know this
sort of randomly drawn function so you
could just keep doing this and the more
the more pieces you divide up into the
better your approximation right so if I
were to be allowed more straight lines
for example up here I might have
straight line straight line straight
line and then carry on so the more
straight lines you're allowed and the
more pieces you divide your axis up into
the better your a piecewise
approximation will be and this is one
way actually of constructing
approximations to curves so this is
something getting into numerical
analysis which is the study of how
computers do maths basically it's
thinking about how do you program a
computer to calculate an integral or to
plot a curve and you use approximations
like this for example so it's a really
nice question Johnny and it also allows
me to lead into our advanced topic for
today and also
somebody has commented hello my brick
nebula you have commented about Fourier
series so I was actually going to end my
just
now by briefly mentioning Fourier series
because I've talked about so we've
mentioned lines of best fit I've talked
about approximating curves so it very
naturally leads into a discussion on
Fourier series so I will show you what a
Fourier series is what the idea is so
here we were trying to approximate
functions by straight lines that was the
idea that was Johnny's question based on
our lesson on straight line graphs so
now let's suppose I have any old
function so again this is X this is y
let's suppose I've got some y equals f
of X and that's those works in like that
all right so it's a pretty funky looking
thing as it does that I say and that's
going y equals f of X now Fourier series
is basically all the sort of the the
usefulness the awesome thing about
Fourier series is that they say I can
approximate any function however
accurately I want so my function here f
of X my Fourier series tells me I can
write this as an infinite sum of cause
terms plus sine terms where I'm summing
so kind of like what I was mentioning
earlier with you have different parts of
your straight line to go where we could
do various straight lines approximate
this but Fourier series tells you for
any function f absolutely any function I
can draw you can actually just add
together lots and lots of cars and lots
and lots of sine terms and those terms
all added together will look almost
perfectly like your function f so if I
actually I should probably write out the
correct formula should night
I've missed up the thing in here so I
write it out properly so that I can
write equals okay let's do it
now I've committed going into Fourier
series so the actual formula here's my
cheat sheet so it's forget all of the
coefficients is that f of X is equal to
coefficient a naught divided by two plus
the infinite sum from n is 1 to infinity
of a n cos n PI x over L plus BN sine
and PI x over L right there's your full
formula so there's a lot going on in
this formula so I'll try and talk you
through the idea we have our first so
this is just a constant right Anil is
just the a nor a n a not a n + BN or
what we call the Fourier coefficients so
they are just constants they might be
different for each value of n so these
you know this is a 1 a 2 a 3 all the way
up to wherever so they might be
different for each value of n but they
have a constant value they don't depend
on X so this says that any function X is
written as some constant plus an
infinite sum of cos n PI x over L z-- +
sine n PI x over L and the L is the size
of the domain so in my picture for
example this function is going from
naught so I'm trying to approximate F
between actually in fact and say that
was - let's extend it doesn't need to be
symmetric so let's just suppose it took
that let's extend it and say this is
minus L right so I'm trying to
approximate this crazy function y equals
f of X and I'm trying to do it between
minus L and L and my
for a serious theory tells me I can do
this so this is on X belonging to - L -
L my function f is equal to this
infinite sum infinite series of cos and
sine terms and we actually can we can
derive formulas for these coefficients
which comes from some clever maths if
you're really keen someone wants to see
that you can put it in the chat box and
maybe I'll do a bit of it
but I'll stop there for now so the key
takeaway I wanted to get across before
eh series is first of all they're
amazing but also because I was talking
about approximating functions by
straight lines and said you can get as
much accuracy as you want by taking more
and more straight lines so it turns out
you can get as much accuracy as you want
here by just adding together more and
more cos and sine terms so you can build
any function just using cos and sine
which is totally amazing
and one of my favorite sort of topics in
maths so I teach this to my first-year
students last term we did this and it's
very fun so I'm gonna open up to
questions now I'm gonna stop there if
you want me to go further you can ask it
as a question so we've got about 20
minutes left so does anybody currently
watching how many maths questions they
would like to ask I'd be it be great if
they were related to straight line
graphs they don't have to be at this
point I talked a lot about straight line
graphs and some other topics so feel
free to feel free to include other
topics if you want I'll give you a
moment
thank for everyone's being shy otherwise
we'll do more Fourier series all right
how would you determine the complex
roots of a quadratic nice alright let's
have a look at that thank you Sam
so completely different topic so first
of all should mention here that we given
a particular quadratic right so let's
take our most standard ax squared plus
BX plus C all right here's a quadratic
all quadratics look like this some in
some forms now given this we don't
actually know straight away if the roots
are real or complex that's not obvious
from looking at the equation itself we
really don't know so what you have to do
to figure it out is use your quadratic
formula so your quadratic formula tells
you that X is minus B plus or minus the
square root B squared C over 2a right
now given so a B and C I'm gonna suppose
to make it easier a B and C are gonna be
real numbers so if I'm going to get a
complex number it has to happen like a
complex number has a square root of a
negative number as part of it right so a
complex number would be for example x
equals let's call it alpha plus beta
times I where I is the square root of -1
so the only way you're going to get this
square root of -1
is going to come from the square root in
my quadratic formula right so here this
is the only way it's going to happen
because this is a real number and I'm
dividing by a real number so it's not
possible if these are both real numbers
to get an I to appear so the I the only
way this appears is from the bit under
the square root sign and so the question
is then you can now from this determine
whether you will or won't get complex
roots so if b squared minus 4ac is
positive then what I'm doing is I'm
taking the square root of a positive
number which gives me a real number so
this gives me real roots but if this is
negative is negative then I've got the
square root of a negative number so
we're talking about I we're talking
about complex numbers and so this is
negative I get complex roots and it's a
straightforward as that sound so the I
guess given this equation you look at
your a you'll be in your C you calculate
this which is called your discriminant
and if your discriminant is negative
then you have complex roots if it's
positive you have real roots all right
what else have we got so I've got ok
think about
I how did we know that pi is irrational
in the first place and how do my
traditions create algorithms to find out
the value of pi oh all right how do we
know pi is irrational okay let me think
about how would I attack that one how do
we know it's high it's irrational so off
the top of my head I'm not entirely sure
if I'm aware of a proof about pi being
irrational however I would guess my
instincts are telling me to think about
the same way that we prove other numbers
are irrational so what I mean by that is
the classic example would be this proof
that the square root of two is
irrational and the way we prove that for
example is through proof by
contradiction so you assume it's not so
assume not irrational and what we're
going to do is hopefully get to
something that is complete nonsense so
my guess would be you could try and do
something like this with PI but I'm not
sure it would quite work in the same way
I probably I'll have a think about how
specifically to apply it to PI but in
the mean time we'll do it for root two
because it's a really nice proof and if
you want you can try and use this method
on PI and see if that works I don't
think it will but it's the only idea
that I've got for attacking where the
numbers are rational or irrational so we
assume it's not irrational so if it's
not irrational that means it can be
written as a fraction it means it's a
rational number so it can be written as
one number divided by another
so if it's not irrational that means it
must be rational and so that means that
root two is equal to how do I know me
write this P over Q it's a fraction one
number divided by another and I'm gonna
make one further sort of technical
assumption but very important assumption
here when I write my number which root 2
PI root 3 whatever number you want when
I write it as a fraction P and Q have no
common factors so what I mean by this is
if I were to consider any fraction right
so iota consider 1/2 that's equal to 2
over 4 it's equal to 50 over 100 it's
equal to lots of other things right they
are all 1/2 so what I mean by saying P
and Q have no common factors is I've got
this the lowest and simplest possible
version of the fraction when I've
written P and Q here right which has to
be true if if root 2 can be written as a
fraction I can always find the simplest
possible fracture so that has to be true
right what are we going to do now so and
this is where I think trying to do this
2 pi might not work because the trick
when you're doing square roots is to
square both sides of your equation
because we don't like square roots
they're horrible fiddly things but if I
square both sides then I get something
that I know how to deal with I get the
number 2 so if we do that we get 2 is
equal to P squared and the Q squared
right
that's just squaring both sides now that
tells me that P squared is equal to 2
times Q squared so
this tells me something very important
about the number P so number P here is
equal to 2 sorry the number P squared is
equal to 2 times something we don't care
what the something is but if I have a
number which here is P squared I have a
number equal to 2 times something else
that means P squared is an even number
because there's no other like that's how
you define even numbers even numbers are
all numbers divisible by 2 or all
numbers with a factor of 2 in their
prime factorization so by definition
this means exactly that P squared is
even because it can be divided by 2 and
give you a whole number so P squared is
therefore even it's what that line tells
me really really important like the
whole proof kind of depends on that
logic so if I have so B squared is P
times P and when I multiply P by itself
I get an even number so P can be either
even or odd so if P is odd for example
if P was odd then an odd number times an
odd number gives you something odd you
can try this in your head 7 times 7 49 3
times 3 9 5 times 5 25 whatever number
you pick all times odd is always an odd
number so the only way I can get P times
P being even is if P is even because an
even number multiplied by itself gives
you an even number and you cannot get
that by doing odd times odd so P in fact
is even
okay P is an even number is where we've
got to now if we go back to here the
equation in the box and we use our
newfound knowledge about P being even
right because this is we've worked hard
to get to this point so let's plug it
back in and see what that tells us about
Q because we know P is even so it's
probably helpful to try and work out
maybe Q is even maybe here is odd it
would be nice to know something about Q
so P is even which means that P is equal
to 2 times something let's call it m so
again you define an even number as 2
times something so if I now take my even
number P plug it into my equation here
I've got this side is now 4m squared
equals to Q squared just simply plugging
in the P is even an equal to 2 times M
now I can simplify a bit I can rearrange
to get Q squared is equal to 2 times M
squared so the equation in the pink box
looks very similar to the equation in
the blue box because it's the same kind
of idea so we know here we said P
squared is even so that means P must be
even then here we've got Q squared is
now even same idea this tells me Q
squared is even so exactly as before if
P squared was even then P was even so if
Q squared is even then Q is even right I
think I've done the proof does anybody
want to tell me why the proof is now
complete
excellent thank you Sam they're both
even pee is even Q is even but I said
here P and Q have no common factors but
they're both even so they both have a
common factor of two so this is absolute
nonsense so this is now is your
contradiction do you draw this fun
little symbol contradiction because
we've shown that if root two was arash
was rational if it was rational then we
get something that's nonsense because I
said these have no common factors but
then we showed that they're both even so
they both have two as a factor so
obviously I did something very silly at
the beginning I made an assumption that
was false the only assumption that could
have been was assuming that it wasn't
irrational so therefore it has to be
irrational so not quite the question I
was asked about pi
but hopefully something at least vaguely
interesting and in the right kind of
area talking about irrational numbers
and how you might prove that a number is
irrational so I've got about five
minutes left so we'd probably do one
more question if anyone has anything
else they would like to ask
I can see a good fun one actually from
Prashant all right let's do that one cuz
I get to draw more fun pictures so
Prashant has asked thank you for the
question has asked what is the
equivalent of the gradient or the slope
in three dimensions so when you have a
line in 2d you define its gradients so
Fisher wants to know how do we work with
that in three dimensions it's a very
very good question so the way we do it
is as follows well there are two ways to
think about it I guess okay so if we
have rights if we have a line y equals
MX plus C so this is a line and the
gradient is just M right now if I have a
let's take a three-dimensional shape so
I'm going to take a three-dimensional
shape so let's suppose let's take a
sphere right let's take our easiest
three-dimensional shape so here is a
sphere right and so you could ask what
is the gradient of a sphere all right so
that would be a perfectly reasonable
question you might sound a bit silly but
you can ask this and you can figure this
out so the way we do gradients over here
it's kind of worth thinking about
derivatives so for a straight line Y is
MX plus C so we said that the gradient
is M however you could also calculate
your derivative dy by DX again don't
worry if you've never seen derivatives
but regardless if you have then there's
some big sets differentiate this so this
is a constant M is a constant to the X
and that just gives you em so from our
straight line equation we have said the
gradient is given by m but another way
to work that out is to do dy by DX this
is your
derivative gives you the gradient right
so this is also obviously the gradient
so now when you go into higher
dimensions you generalize this into more
dimensions so for my sphere can anyone
tell me the equation for a sphere in
Cartesian coordinates so the equation of
a sphere in terms of x y&z X plus y so
possesses got
excellent Thank You Harvey x squared
plus y squared
let's said spread so what I'm gonna do
so Harvey is written correctly X square
plus y simple said squared is equal to
the radius squared but what I'm going to
do is just rearrange it so I can write
it as a function of F X Y Z so I can
just put the minus radius squared so
it's when it's when this is zero is now
my equation of my sphere but writing it
like so so we've got F X Y Zed x squared
Y squared Z squared minus a squared is
equal to zero
equation of my sphere but by writing it
like this as F equals something I can
now generalize this method and this idea
so we have the so here we had Y is a
function of X right so I should put that
so this is y is f of X and our gradient
was done by calculating the derivative
of F or the derivative of Y so now I've
got f of X Y Z so I want to calculate
the derivative in the same way so the
derivative I've got different
derivatives now have an eye because here
this was a function of X only but now
I've got a function of X it's a function
of Y and it's a function of zet because
I'm in three dimensions so I've got
different three different axes or I can
move around on my sphere so what I want
to do is generalize the derivative to
three dimensions so you just want to
differentiate with respect to your three
variables so these are partial
derivatives they work exactly the same
exactly the same as a full derivative
except you just differentiate with
respect to one variable so for example
when I do DF by DX as a partial
derivative and this is my function f
what you do is I just say well I'm going
to pretend when I do my partial
derivative pretend that Y is constant
because I'm only interested in how how
does
act change with respect to X that's what
a derivative is this says how does y
change with respect to X
how does F change with respect to X so
I'm ignoring y&z they are constant why
is that a constant for the purposes of
my derivative I only care about how it
changes with respect to X so I just do
an X derivative of this function so DF
by DX is just 2 times X this is a
constant with respect to X so that
vanishes that's a constant with respect
to X and that's a constant anyway and
you just do the same for DF by dy and
the F by DZ sorry I lost my microphone
second I think it's back I'm sure you'll
all tell me if you can't hear me right
so final thing so we've got DF by DX is
2x
same part in the same idea DF by dy so
this was 2 X this is 2 y this is to Zed
same idea when you do DF by dy you treat
X as a constant
you treat Z as a constant so you only
differentiate to get 2y same for DF by
DZ you treat x and y as constants now
we've calculated our three partial
derivatives and these kind of you can
think of it as saying well so we've
worked out the change in a certain
direction for the three different
possible directions because we're in 3d
space so how do we write three
components as a gradient and if you
think about it a little bit you might
think vectors and that's basically what
we do so you write down your answer is
just going to be for the sphere to X to
Y to Z and we label it with the rad
function like that so this is the
gradient of a sphere so it works in
exactly the same way as we worked out
the gradient of a line you differentiate
with respect to your variable but when
we're in 2d or 3d space we have two or
three variables so you just
differentiate with respect to each of
them put the x1 in the first place in
your vector the y1 in the second place
in your vector and the Zed one in the
third place so that's for the smear and
in general the gradient of a surface is
just partial DF by DX partial DF by dy
partial ya by DZ so that's the jammer
formula for any surface F or any shape
3d shape F where you just have to write
it as your equation equals zero then you
calculate the derivatives plug into here
that's the gradient of a 2d or 3d shape
great question thank you for sham right
you leave it there for this week I will
be back in a week so don't worry if you
have more questions you can send them in
to me between now and next week that's
fine or of course you can tune in in
exactly one week's time and ask the
questions live
so the theme next week the video coming
out on Monday what was that one oh we're
doing trigonometry so we're doing
trigonometry in the video on Monday Tom
rocks mass appeal so please do look out
for that that'll be out around midday
also UK time mid day on Monday then if
you have any questions you can send them
to Bobby and Susan by Wednesday and
they'll answer your questions in their
video they record on Thursday and then
that comes out Friday and then I do my
live stream on Friday 4 o'clock
UK time which is GMT plus one so there's
two of these left so I hope you've been
enjoying them so far but this is the
fourth one now finish we've got two left
for our two final mass appeal topics I
I'm also thinking I may keep doing these
long term because I actually quite enjoy
the ease of fun so if you also enjoy
these please do keep turning up and if
you keep turning up I'll probably he
says keep doing them awesome so thank
you again everybody and I'll hopefully
see you all in a week all right